---
title: On human mobility and language dispersal
isBlogPost: True
image: ../images/blog/loog_et_al.jpg
---

import Blogfigure from "../../components/blogfigure"

<Blogfigure relPath="images/blog/IMPRS-Jena-Logo3.jpeg" width={8}/>

We recently advertised [16 new PhD
positions](https://imprs.shh.mpg.de/index.php/applications/open-positions/)
within our newly founded [Max Planck Research School for the Science of Human
History](https://imprs.shh.mpg.de), an institution tied both to the
[University of Jena](https://www.uni-jena.de/en/) and the [Max Planck Institute
for the Science of Human History](https://www.shh.mpg.de/en) in Jena.

Within this call, I am seeking candidates for working on a new project in my
group titled “[Co-estimating Human Mobility and Language Dispersal with Ancient
DNA and Linguistic
Data](https://imprs.shh.mpg.de/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/02-Co-estimating-Human-Mobility-and-Language-Dispersal-with-Ancient-DNA-and-Linguistic-Data.pdf)”.
It is based on a [scientific article](https://www.pnas.org/content/114/46/12213)
that I learned about recently, by Lisa Loog and coworkers from University
College London. In this paper, Loog and colleagues develop a new estimator for
human mobility throug time, based on ancient genetic data. I want to briefly
explain in this post how their estimation of human mobility works, and how I
intend to extend it in this PhD project.

*****

The challenge of analysing ancient genetic data is that data is distributed
sparsely both in space and in time. For example, we might have samples from 4000
years ago from one region, and from 3000 years ago from another region, so what
does their genetic relationship plausibly say about the movement of people
through time and space?

Loog and colleagues addressed this challenge in a new way. They realised the
following simple principle: If people move around a lot, different ancestries
tend to come together close in space. In contrast, if people tend to stay where
they are born for many generations, neighbours tend to have similar ancestries.
Put in their own words:

> If mobility was low (i.e., strong spatial structure), then we would expect
> differences between entities to be more strongly correlated with space, relative
to time, whereas if mobility was high we would expect time to explain a
relatively larger proportion of differences between entities (because of the
homogenizing effects of high mobility across space).

So it is clear that in general, the closer people are in space *and *time, the
more genetically similar they should be. But the relative weights of how similar
they are in space *versus* time is a direct estimator for human mobility.

*****

Loog and colleagues used this basic idea to develop a statistical method that
tracks human mobility *through time*. Here is their main figure:

<Blogfigure relPath="images/blog/loog_et_al.jpg" width={9}>
  from Loog et al. “Estimating mobility using sparse data: Application to human
genetic variation”, *PNAS*, 2017 (CC BY-NC-ND)</Blogfigure>

This analysis covers West Eurasia, and it shows an estimate of human mobility
from 14,000 years ago until 2,000 years ago. The yellow band in panel A
describes the uncertainty of their migration rate (mobility) estimator through
time. The first decay between 14,000 and 12,000 years ago can be ignored for
now, as it is not statistically significant. However there are three spikes of
human mobility in more recent times that correspond strikingly to several key
transformation periods in human history.

The first time where human mobility peaked is between 8,000 and 6,000 years ago,
which is the time when agriculture first spread through Europe, as a new way of
life, and — as [genetic studies have
shown](http://science.sciencemag.org/content/336/6080/466) — as new people who
descend from early Anatolian farmers and who first replaced and then intermixed
with indigenous Hunter-Gatherers all throughout Europe. The second period of
peaking human mobility was between around 5,000 and 3,500 years ago, according
to this analysis, which corresponds to the onset of the Bronze Age and is the
time of another [large migration](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature14317)
in Europe, this time with ancestry from the Pontic Caspian Steppe. The third
peak in their analysis falls into the Iron Age and perhaps later.

This striking description of human migration through time was quantified using
human data directly, rather than from archaeological or historical sources,
which in contrast to genetic data are somewhat more open to interpretation.

*****

OK, so what else is there to do in this PhD project? One thing that we are good
at in our [IMPRS](https://imprs.shh.mpg.de) is the combination of different
disciplines, such as Linguistics and Genetics. In particular, I would like to
use the Loog et al. framework to investigate language dispersal on top of human
mobility.

Of course, languages spread differently from genes, and while the spread of
languages and genes is often correlated, it doesn’t have to. Takes as an example
England: While England has undergone a 100% Language replacement in the early
Medieval times (from Celtic to Germanic), there certainly was not a 100%
replacement of people ([our estimate of admixture is
40%](/posts/2016-01-22-raremut1.html),
and that is actually already much higher than what many other scholars believe).

So how can we combine linguistic and genetic data in a combined model inspired
by Loog et al.? My idea is to introduce linguistic distances between samples,
much as we have genetic distances. The simplest one could just be a probability
for having spoken different languages. Such a metric is difficult to assign, but
it could be done with some uncertainty.

With a dataset consisting of pairwise genetic distances as well as linguistic
distances, we can then try to jointly estimate human mobility and language
dispersal. Of course, there are lots of caveats to be figured out, but with high
risk comes high gain: We might learn *quantitatively, *how much people carried
around their languages as they moved, or to what extent they adopted existing
local languages.

If you are looking to pursue a PhD, not afraid of mathematical modelling, some
programming, and working with (very different kinds of) data, then consider
applying to this project!
