---
title: "Behind the paper: Paleo-Eskimo ancestry in North America"
isBlogPost: True
image: ../images/blog/PaleoEskimoCover-small.jpg
---

import Blogfigure from "../../components/blogfigure"

*This post appeared originally on the [Nature Ecology & Evolution Community blog](https://natureecoevocommunity.nature.com/users/253326-stephan-schiffels/posts/49657-paleo-eskimo-ancestry-in-north-america-or-how-to-grow-a-paper-from-6-to-35-authors)*.

*Reference: [https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1251-y](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1251-y)*

In October 2015 — I had just started my new job as Group Leader at the newly
founded [Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human
History](https://www.shh.mpg.de) in Jena, Germany — we were visited by a young
researcher, Pavel Flegontov, from Ostrava University in Czech Republic. Pavel is
a computational biologist who a few years ago got himself interested in human
population genetics and prehistory. I was at the time about to publish our paper
on [Anglo-Saxon ancient DNA from
England](/posts/2016-01-22-raremut1.html),
for which we developed new methodology to investigate fine-scale population
structure based on rare genetic variation. Pavel wanted to apply this new
methodology to an open genetic question in the literature about Athabaskans, an
ethnic group from North America. David Reich, a geneticist from Harvard
University, had shown previously in a [paper in
2012](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature11258) that Athabaskans have a
distinct ancestry component not shared with many other Native Americans and
which could be related to Paleo-Eskimos.

<Blogfigure relPath="images/blog/PaleoEskimoCover-wide.jpg" altText="Drawing of a Paleo-Eskimo woman with a baby-child on her back looking over Alaska and North America"> Paleo-Eskimos were known from Archaeology as the first people that inhabited the Arctic regions in North America and Greenland, from about 4500 until 700 years ago. A 4000 year old individual from the Paleo-Eskimo Saqqaq culture in Greenland was the first ancient human whose genome was [completely sequenced](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature08835). ©Illustration by Kerttu Majander, Design by Michelle O’Reilly</Blogfigure>

*****

About two weeks after Pavel’s visit in Jena, I got an email from him saying
“There is a signal!”. Indeed what we found was that the pattern of rare
mutations of Athabaskans shared with Siberian and American populations matched
that of Saqqaq (an ancient Paleo-Eskimo genome), but not that of Inuit. I was
excited, but also somewhat concerned, since I had previously contributed to
[another
paper](http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/349/6250/aab3884.full),
published earlier in 2015, in which we argued Athabaskans to be related to
Inuit, not Paleo-Eskimos. But the signal persisted, also when applying other
methods, based on other data than shared rare variation.

When we released [a
preprint](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/074476v1.full) about our work
in 2016, it was overwhelmingly met with enthusiasm from other colleagues in the
field, but also with criticism from some of my former coauthors from the 2015
paper (one colleague called our work “unscholarly” and “manipulative”, but
apologised later). Some feedback was very useful, though, in particular there
was one flaw in the original analysis that was brought to our attention. This
kind of feedback is exactly what preprints are so useful for!

Another consequence of our preprint was that it caught the interest of David
Reich, who offered us ancient genomic data from the Aleut islands and from
Alaska that had been generated in his lab and that he felt would fit well into
our study. We happily agreed to co-analyse it within our paper, and at this
point decided — despite positive reviews from the first journal — to resubmit in
the fall of 2017 to a different journal with higher visibility in the field.
This almost never happens, we normally submit somewhere, get rejected, and try a
lower-tier journal next. Here it was the opposite direction: up!

<Blogfigure relPath="images/blog/attu_island.jpg" altText="Image of Attu Island, with a lake and mountains in the background"> Attu Island, Aleutian Islands, Alaska. ©*Photo credit: *Jason Rogers</Blogfigure>

<Blogfigure relPath="images/blog/middle_dorset.jpg" altText="Two people working at the excavation site of the Middle Dorset individual in Canada"> The excavation of the Middle Dorset individual from the Buchanan site on southeastern Victoria Island, Nunavut, Central Canadian Arctic. ©*Photo credit: *T. Max Friesen</Blogfigure>

In the mean time, this project took on a life of its own. Because David is
uncannily well connected (and I’m pretty sure never sleeps), over the course of
the next months he assembled more than 37 additional ancient genomes via
multiple project partners from relevant sites in Canada, Chukotka and Central
Siberia, that were also contributed to our project. In total, since our first
submission and our first preprint, the number of novel ancient genomes described
in our paper climbed from zero to 48! As a consequence, modelling became a lot
harder. Although reviews were again actually fairly positive, we spent an
unusually long time to rework our model to encompass all the additional data.

In early 2018, Pavel hit a breakthrough, which lead to the last piece of the
puzzle to fall into place, which was bi-directional gene flow between ancestors
of Inuit and Yup’ik, and ancestors of Chukotkan people. When we introduced this
feature into the model, we could finally explain why there was Native American
ancestry present west of the Bering Straight, and why Inuit are more closely
related to people from Chukotka than expected under the previous model. This
breakthrough ultimately lead to the final model that is now in the paper:

<Blogfigure relPath="images/blog/Paleo-Eskimo-model.jpg" altText="Phylogenetic model connecting present-day populations from Europe, Asia and North and South America"> From Figure 2 of our [published paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-019-1251-y). In our final model, Paleo-Eskimos are involved in the founder population of Athabaskans, as well as Eskimo-Aleut speaking groups, although the latter mixed more recently with Chukotko-Kamchatkan ancestors.</Blogfigure>

*****

For me personally, the project sure was a learning experience: As the paper has
grown from having just 6 to now 35 authors, my role has changed from being a
part in a small team of equals, to managing a large author team with a wide
range of different perspectives and roles. The project was also a lesson in
patience: Since first submission to Nature, our paper spent 263 days in peer
review, 241 days in revision, and 100 days in production since its acceptance
until today.

I couldn’t be more thrilled to finally seeing it published!
