---
title: Tracking your time helps you stay mentally sane.
isBlogPost: True
image: ../images/blog/clock.jpg
---

import Blogfigure from "../../components/blogfigure"

<Blogfigure relPath="images/blog/clock_image.jpg" altText="An oldschool watch lying in sand">Test</Blogfigure>

Working in academia comes with unique freedoms and challenges. I would argue
that in no other job we have so much freedom to define our own work. At least at
the Post-doctoral level and beyond, you mostly can choose *what* problems you
want to work on, *how* to solve them, and in *what pace. *Even as a PhD student,
in many cases there is a lot of freedom to choose projects and set your own
goals and deadlines (this may not be the case for everybody, but it was for me).


This is both a blessing and curse. While this kind of freedom may seem like
paradise to people working in shifts or being frustrated by being told by their
bosses what to do, it also bears a high risk to induce stress. One particular
habit that many academics foster, is an overwhelming focus *on what they did not
yet get done*, as opposed to celebrating what they *did get done*. At least for
me, this was the case while being a Postdoc and at the beginning of my time as a
group leader. There is always more to do and you’re constantly behind your
(self-imposed over-ambitious) schedule. For me the feeling worsened, expectedly,
after having had my second child, which made working after hours and on weekends
practically impossible.

I feel that general awareness about this has grown recently. Discussions about
how to maintain work-life balance and mental health are all over twitter. And
that’s a good thing. In hoping to contribute some experience to the topic, here
is the single most effective habit that improved my own attitude towards my
work.

*****

About a year ago, I started tracking my time. I simply wanted to collect some
data about how much and what I *actually *work. The original incentive to do it
came from being annoyed that every decision about how much vacation to take, or
whether I should work after hours or on the weekend was dominated by the feeling
that I didn’t work enough, because — as described above — there is always more
to be done.

I installed a software called [toggl](https://toggl.com)* *on my Desktop and
phone, which is a tool that lets you start a timer and record what you’re
working on. It’s free to use, but you can pay for premium, which I haven’t done
so far. The free version already allows you to set up projects and “clients”
(the latter is useless in my case but could be used for tracking time spent on
particular grants I guess), and produce simple reports on how much time you’ve
spent in any period of time on each project. You can also use tags to separate
different types of work, for example email, supervision, travelling, and so on.
I should say that I’ve not always been super-disciplined on recording all these
aspects (like projects and tags), but even at a relatively simple level,
tracking my time had some unexpected positive consequences for me.

#### 1. I am feeling more positive about my work

One thing that most time-tracking software encourages you to do is to log what
you worked on at what time. That may sound tedious at first, but it’s fairly
easy and quick, and the software even reminds you to start logging if you’re
returning to your computer in the morning, or after a break.

Well, it turns out that I do a lot of different things over the day. Some of
these things I would count as “important for my career” or “things I really care
about”, let’s call them *category A* tasks. This mainly includes working on
publications, data analyses, writing papers, preparing grant applications,
applying for conferences, public talks, networking, blog posts, and so on.

Many other things I do during the day belong to *category B, *which are things
that don’t really help my career that much and/or things I don’t get much
recognition for. This includes peer review (reviewing papers from other people
as a request from journal editors), replying to emails from clueless users of my
software, improving documentation for my software, serving in committees X, Y
and Z, filling out reimbursement forms, writing support letters, reading CVs,
some aspects of project management…

Before I started tracking, time spent on things in category A felt like *real
work*, and which gave me fulfillment and satisfaction. In contrast, all the
things in category B felt as if they don’t really count, and that I have to do
them *on top of my actual work*. And this is exactly the problem that in my view
causes a good chunk of stress that academics impose on themselves. After a day
spent on doing category B things, you feel like “I should really work in the
evening to actually get *anything *done.”

This changed when starting time-tracking and more importantly -logging. It turns
out that reviewing that log gives me a sense of achievement, even for days that
I would have formerly described as “wasted time”. Whenever I’m now doing
something from category B, and I see the timer running, I somehow get the
feeling as if *it counts. *As a result, I’m getting more honest with myself
about my job, which improves my attitude towards it.

#### 2. I have become a more realistic project manager

Logging how much time you’ve spent on each project is a very useful source of
data. For example, I’ve written a large grant last fall, and I know exactly that
the amount of time spent on it was 112 hours. This is a *lot *more (perhaps by a
factor 2) than what I would have estimated. The reason was that I’ve spent so
much time on email to get all the project partners on board, and I previously
didn’t count that in.

I’ve also spent way* *more time that I would have thought on simply finalising
and submitting a paper earlier this summer. Over 90 hours I’ve spent with
emailing all co-authors, asking for supplementary material, getting edits
integrated, meeting with authors and discussing restructurings… I’m not even
talking about doing the actual analysis or the core writing (which wasn’t done
by me). These things were real time spent, and that’s useful to know for future
projects.

#### 3. I feel better about times where I don’t work

Coming in the morning and hitting the start button of my toggl timer helps
focusing and gives a sense of achievement, as argued above. On the other side of
the medal is switching the timer *off *in the evening. I feel that I enjoy times
where I’m *not *working more since tracking time. This perhaps has — again — to
do with the fact that instead of constantly reminding myself what didn’t get
done, you *know *that you’ve worked already for 9 hours today, so you deserve a
cold beer on the couch with Netflix now.

I was never good at switching off after work, and I still suck at it. But it has
improved. By developing a habit of making work-time really count, at the same
time you develop a habit of better switching off after work. Somehow, knowing
that a timer is running in the background while working, means that if the timer
is *not *running, I’m more relaxed.

#### 4. I can better balance out work-time, family-time, and hobbies

Finally, in negotiating work vs. family vs. personal vs. hobby time with
yourself, your partner, your kids, your friends, time-tracking has given me a
solid data source to rely on. This may sound silly at first, but it makes a real
difference.

For example, there is a tendency to over-estimate the total time you’re working
per week. That’s actually a bit strange, since at the same time you’re feeling
you haven’t worked enough. It turns out that the average amount of time spent
per week — for me — isn’t too much off my self-imposed “standard”. Knowing this
gives some calm moment into any discussion about this, and it goes in both
directions. Neither can you walk around complaining not having worked enough
anymore (the numbers say that’s not true), nor can anyone else in your life
claim that you’ve been working too much (again, the numbers are pretty OK).

*****

Tracking time in academia is not something that comes very natural. We have
chosen this job because we love to think about problems while we’re doing the
dishes, while we’re going for a run, while we’re (not) falling asleep. And to
some extent that’s wonderful and healthy. But the lack of external control on
how much of your energy you’re putting into your work is dangerous. Tracking
time puts an external metric in control that lets you reflect more actively
about your work, and more importantly your non-work time.

Now, I’m not going to reveal here how much I define as my “standard” working
time per week, since that’s super-subjective and depends on many things: Age,
energy available, family situation, health, and many other things. But I can say
that my standard doesn’t force me to work late at night or on the weekend.
Paradoxically, that choice is true freedom, and sometimes makes me *actually* work on the weekends, and it feels OK because I’m logging it and *it counts.*
